---
layout: post
title:  Why Read?
date:   2021-03-29
categories: jekyll update
---

James Song

Ignorance is debilitating enough that you definitely benefit from having a map of the world. And there are many more worlds than you have time to personally explore. So we use the experiences of others to add to our incomplete understanding. 

Words store information of at least four types. The integration of these--imagery, narrative, abstraction, and fact--is probably necessary to illuminate Truth. Behind the scenes, information may contain intentions and emotions. An awareness of these aspects enriches your understanding. 

Information enables you to draw a map of the world. The more abundant and varied your information, the higher the resolution of your map[^1]. 

There is a world of information that any bit of seemingly isolated information carries. And the quantity and quality[^2] of information depends more on the listener than the speaker.

The speaker’s responsibility is to present her thought as clearly and honestly as possible, partially or in its entirety. It is the listener’s job to listen to the words (direct reception) and hear what is being communicated (indirect reception). 

And how can either fulfill their part of the contract without being fully engaged?

-\
Notes:

[^1]: Narrow-minded loyalty to one book or school of thought is probably good at the beginning, as intellectual training wheels, just as strict religious control tends to accompany the earlier epochs of civilizations that last, and just as the most successful MMA fighters start with one core martial art before generalizing. But it’s hard to commit to one school--or book, or religion, or branch of academic discipline, or political system--as The School that absolutely answers everything.

[^2]: A word for “quality and quantity” would help here.