---
layout: post
title:  "Journal Session with Low Vitamin D: In Which the Generally Stoic Narrator Is Harassed by Footnotes"
permalink: /journal/
date:   2025-02-08
categories: jekyll update
---

Daniel LaPointe

Did not take the Vitamin D supplement today or the multivitamin. Though I *did* go for a two-mile walk outside earlier, this was rather close to sunset. Given that it’s the dead of winter and given that I haven’t eaten any foods containing Vitamin D recently (to my knowledge), I’m likely pretty damn low in the stuff right now. Some observations:

* When looking at my phone’s lock screen photo[^1], I[^2] immediately began to think of the depicted mountain range as a 3D object, if that makes sense. That is, I immediately intuited that the image was facing south and that the mountain on the left side of the image depicted the east-most part of the range. My brain (God I hate using that phrase, but it feels appropriate here) then superimposed over the mountains the trail that I followed when hiking them. At various points of interest along the trail – these visible in the image – I involuntarily recalled what the views were like from those points. There was something immensely satisfying about this all playing out so efficiently – in the span of less than a second. Though I’ve long had difficulty locating the right permutation of words to communicate this sensation, the [Random Walks] (link) essay gets at it with: “I just want to… imagine where I am in relation to everything else.”

Notes:

[^1]: hello, footnote testing[^a].

[^2]: second[^b] ftnt.

[^a]: # hello.

[^b]: # so. 
