---
layout: post   
title: "Artie Choke’s Guide to Expensive Tastes"   
permalink: /expensive/  
date:   2026-04-216
nav_exclude: true    
---
Artie Choke

Have you ever wondered what the most expensive thing you could buy would be if you had a stupid amount of money? Well, for about ten dollars you can get yourself a pint of ice cream. However, if you wanted a more expensive ice cream and you were stupid enough you could waste a thousand dollars by getting the Golden Opulence sundae. This sundae offers 24-karat edible gold leaves, rare chocolate, and Tahitian vanilla, which is the most expensive vanilla in the world.  Next, if you have 6,696 dollars to spare you can get the Byakuya gelato which is the most expensive ice cream in the world, as of April 12, 2026.  The reason why this is so expensive is because it has edible gold leaves (like all other expensive stuff) and also has rare white truffles from Alba that cost 15,000 dollars per kilogram.

Now we hit the 100 million to 500 billion-dollar mark. With 100 million dollars you could build infrastructure and your focus would turn to building things instead of buying things. If you actually had 500 billion dollars to spare you could build a colony on Mars—yes, Elon Musk has enough money to build a colony on Mars, as of April 12, 2026. If you actually had 500 billion dollars and you were building a colony on Mars, you wouldn’t just be buying land, but you would be buying the gas and other essentials humans need to survive. 

If you had 700 quintillion dollars—maybe even as low as 100 quintillion dollars, depending on the current price of the materials—you could buy the asteroid 16 Psyche. The reason this asteroid is so expensive is that it is made out of 27 sextillion kilograms—which is 59.52 sextillion pounds for my American readers—of nickel, iron, and gold, where all calculations are based on the prices of these materials as of April 2026. However, there would also be a price for the fuel and energy used to move the asteroid into orbit, which would add about another 40 quintillion dollars.

With 8 septillion (8 × 10<sup>24</sup>) dollars you would have the value of everything on Earth. With 8 septillion dollars you would have enough money to replace the elements and chemicals that make up the Earth’s crust, mantle, and core. In simple terms, you could buy the Earth.

With 10 octillion dollars you can build a Dyson swarm. A Dyson swarm is a giant structure around a star that uses mirrors to absorb all the massive amounts of energy the star releases. To build a Dyson swarm you would need to dismantle a planet similar to mercury to make 1 quintillion (10<sup>18</sup>) mirrors to collect and redirect the Sun’s 380 septillion watts of energy to central power stations that take the light and turn it into energy.

If you had 1 vigintillion (10<sup>63</sup>) dollars and a computer strong enough you could afford the energy bill required to run and track every single atom in every single galaxy. This means that you could create a replica of reality so perfect that no one would be able to know the difference between the real universe and the fake universe you could create.

Even if you actually have this much money you still wouldn’t be able to do any of these things because humans are not advanced enough to have the technology but with enough money you could boost the speed of technological advancement.
